[Music]
six Red Scare
in the closing weeks of world war one
fears of revolutionaries anarchists
Bolsheviks radicals and communists began
to mount in America a series of bombings
aimed at public officials labor unrest
remnants of wartime hysteria and
xenophobia and zealous government
investigators eager to prove their worth
in ferreting out the despoilers of
democracy contributed to the frenzy
footnote on the mood of the country at
this time C Murray B Levin political
hysteria in America New York basic books
1971 for a concise history of this
episode see Robert K Murray the Red
Scare a study in national hysteria
Minneapolis University of Minnesota
press 1955 in footnote reflective of
this mood Congress in late 1918 enacted
legislation designed to exclude and
expel from the United States certain
aliens belonging to anarchistic groups
or otherwise found to be in sympathy
with the tenets of anarchism the opening
paragraph of the statute stipulated
quote that aliens who are anarchists
aliens who believe in or advocate the
overthrow by force or violence of the
government of the United States or of
all forms of law aliens who disbelieve
in or are opposed to all organized
government aliens who advocate or teach
the assassination of public officials
aliens who advocate or teach the
unlawful destruction of property
aliens who are members of or affiliated
with any organization that entertains a
belief in teaches or advocates the
overthrow by force or violence of the
government of the United States or of
all forms of law or that entertains or
teaches disbelief in or opposition to
all organized government or that
advocates the duty necessity or
propriety of the unlawful assaulting or
killing of any officer or officers
either of specific individuals or of
officers generally of the government of
the United States or of any
other organized government because of
his or her official character or that
advocates or teaches the unlawful
destruction of property shall be
excluded from admission into the United
States
end quote although this law was not a
criminal statute did not outlaw
specified beliefs and actions and
contained no authority for prosecution
it soon became a punitive device in the
hands of the new Attorney General
Alexander mitchell Palmer a former
Democratic member of the House of
Representatives from Pennsylvania 1909
through 1915 and recently the alien
property custodian 1917 to 1919 Palmer
came to the Wilson cabinet as the
country's chief legal officer in March
1919 he rode the tide of prevailing
sentiment and launched an attack upon
radicals of all persuasion perhaps in an
effort to marshal public opinion in an
eventual bid for the White House quote
the atmosphere which prevailed after
World War one was such that anti
radicalism and xenophobia became
inseparably fused thus the deportation
statute was made to order for an
attorney general who combined with his
own person an overdose of the spirit of
the times and a will to propel himself
into the limelight as the very model of
a modern anti-radical the anti
radicalism of that period was not much
ado about nothing rather it was much too
much ado about something a gross
overreaction for a host of Americans a
real problem had assumed fictional
proportions radical violence existed its
advocates were for the most part members
of the Industrial Workers of the world
Bolsheviks or members of one wing of the
anarchist movement the other wing being
pacifist the hopes to which the
revolutionary radicals geared their
actions were wildly unrealistic there
was no danger of their overthrowing the
government but there was danger of their
causing an intolerable destruction of
life and proper
and quote footnote overstreet page 41 in
footnote the wonder of the episode is
that the intelligence agencies failed so
badly and conveying the reality of the
situation the truth of the experience is
that accurate intelligence was not
sought and political expedience
otherwise ruled the day Palmer gave the
Bureau of Investigation the primary
investigative enforcement mission the
other intelligence units were either
incapable or unwilling to temper qualify
or modify the assault which manifested
itself in raids harassment arrests and
expulsion from the land quote the Labor
Department had jurisdiction over the
deportation statute Secretary of Labor
William B Wilson was responsible for
deciding which bodies by reason of their
beliefs and practices
so clearly fitted the terms of the
statute that membership in them would be
sufficient basis for an aliens being
deported he named the Communist Party
and the department's solicitor called
upon to make a decision when the
secretary was absent named the Communist
Labor Party a decision which mr. Wilson
reversed some months later these two
parties were the prime targets of
Palmer's read raids arrest warrants had
to be issued by labor but justice and a
cooperating capacity could request their
issuance and did so in wholesale Lots
after arrests were made the evidence was
turned over to the Secretary of Labor
the assistant secretary Louis B post had
the task of evaluating the evidence to
determine whether or not it justified in
individual cases the signing of
deportation orders these details may
seem academic but one factor which led
in the end to congressional hearings and
an aroused public interest was a
collision between the Attorney General's
policy of mass arrests and posts policy
of judging cases on an individual basis
and canceling a host of warrants
end quote footnote for his own account
of these matters see Lewis F post the
deportations Delirium of 1920 Chicago
Charles H Kerr & Company 1923 end
footnote the first raids on alleged
anarchists and radicals occurred in
November 1919 but it was in January the
following year when massive dragnet
operations began in earnest in spite of
posts cautious administration it has
been estimated that more than 4,000
suspected alien radicals were imprisoned
during the winter of 1919 and 1920 and
eventually the deportation of quote a
wretched few hundred aliens who never
had the opportunity to plead their
innocence and whose guilt the government
never proved end quote
footnote Hyman page 320 and footnote and
what were the techniques of the Bureau
of Investigation in pursuing the radical
quarry the tactics utilized included
reliance on undercover informants to
identify and locate suspects keeping
state and local authorities ignorant of
moves against suspects
so that federal supremacy in this area
of arrests would be assured and engaging
in the physical entrapment of suspects
quote the radicals seemed so numerous
that gid Hoover's general Intelligence
Division decided to try to herd big
groups of them into meeting halls on the
nights assigned for raiding their
membership the way this was done in the
case of the Communists was revealed in
the secret instructions to the bureau's
special agents from its headquarters
dated December 27th 1919 in a document
which the bureau's agents were required
to produce in a Boston trial it read if
possible you should arrange with your
undercover informants to have meetings
of the Communist Party and communist
Labour Party held on the night set I've
been informed by some of the bureau
officers that such arrangements will be
made this of course would facilitate the
making of arrests end quote
other practices included night raids to
facilitate obtaining confessions and to
discourage interference by council
coordination of all raids from
Washington by communications with
intelligence chief Hoover simultaneous
arrest of all suspects whether at the
target meeting halls or in their homes
and a hierarchy of arrest locations the
places where the largest halls might be
expected were the meeting rooms of the
radical organizations next in importance
or the choral societies and the schools
for foreign-born adults here the
bureau's agents picked up both teachers
and students including those on their
way to class and others on the street
suspected of having that destination
next in importance were small shops
operated by suspected radicals in which
the police picked up the customers as
well as the businessmen this was the
case at an East st. Louis tailor shop
where men were standing about in the
evening hours chatting with the
proprietor in some exceptional cases
customers were left behind thus when a
barber was arrested in his Bridgeport
Connecticut place of business and the
Raiders were in too big a hurry to let
him get his overcoat and to permit him
to make his premises secure they did not
bother to wait for the half-shaved
customer in the chair other places for
arresting customers in considerable
numbers where restaurants cafes bowling
alleys billiard and pool parlors social
rooms for playing checkers and other
games and similar points of resort in
cases where concerts or lectures no
matter on what subject were being given
at halls frequented by radicals the
Raiders arrested everyone present in
quote the campaign became so
enthusiastic that American citizens who
had spent the war period overseas were
seized Raiders engaged in violence the
destruction of radicals presses
threatened suspects at gunpoint and made
incarcerations without arrest warrants
those imprisoned were harassed coerced
and otherwise forced into confessions of
guilt which were frequently thrown out
by assistant secretary post
rejected by the courts similarly the
bureau delayed and denied bail to jailed
suspects or demanded exorbitant bonding
all in all the episode demonstrated a
shameless disregard for human rights on
the part of the Justice Department
evoked a contemptuous attitude toward
the Bureau of Investigation on the part
of both Congress and the public and
undoubtedly contributed in some degree
to the failure of the Democrats to
retain control of the White House in
1920 better intelligence and/or the
proper use of available intelligence
might have averted the Fiasco but
politics was in Ascension and
intelligence activities were in decline
in the aftermath of the war what was to
follow was the further disintegration of
the Justice Department under Harry
Daugherty the Teapot Dome scandal crime
Wars and the decomposition of the
intelligence structure
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you